Fault location on high voltage transmission line by applying support vector regression with fault signal amplitudes
 This paper proposes a novel high voltage transmission line fault location scheme based on application of support vector regression (SVR). The proposed scheme just uses the amplitudes of the fault voltage waveforms, measured at a single end of the line. Various types of faults at different locations with different fault impedances and a variety of fault inception angles are studied on a 400 kV–300 km high-voltage transmission line power system. The fault voltages are obtained from 1/8 cycle post-fault signals after the noise has been eliminated using a low-pass filter. The amplitudes of the fault voltage signals are used as features to train the SVR. After training, the SVR is used in the exact location of the fault on the transmission line. When compared with other fault location schemes, the proposed scheme requires less information and a smaller time data window to estimate the fault locations. However, the proposed scheme provides more accurate estimations, irrespective of the fault types, fault inception angles and fault impedances.
Transmission line fault location using traveling wave frequencies and extreme learning machine
 In this research, a new approach was proposed for determining the fault location in transmission lines. Traveling wave frequencies and an extreme learning machine (ELM) were used to determine fault location. Transient signals in the time domain were transformed to the frequency domain using the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and the traveling wave frequencies were detected from the transient frequency spectrum. In order to detect the location of fault, traveling wave frequency was used initially to predict the fault location. The prediction of this fault location was tested for many different fault conditions and was found to be adversely affected by only the source inductance value. This is due to the negative effect of source inductance on wave velocity. Regression feature of ELM was used in order to improve the prediction of fault location and to minimize the negative effect of source inductance. For ELM regression training, values of the fault distance estimated from the traveling-wave frequencies and the source inductance values were used as ELM input data, and the actual distance values were used as ELM output data. After ELM regression training, ELM predicted a new fault location using the input data. The Alternative Transients Program (ATP/EMTP) was used to model J. Marti frequency dependent line model, and the MATLAB program was used to perform fault-detection algorithms. Simulation results show that the proposed method is very successful against many variables such as different fault resistances, source inductances, transmission line characteristics, transmission line lengths.
New fault location scheme for four-circuit untransposed transmission lines
 This paper introduces a new fault location scheme for two-terminal four-circuit untransposed transmission line using synchronized measurements. The current phasors at both line terminals and the voltage phasor at only one terminal are needed to formulate the fault location equation. The proposed scheme is developed based on theory of transmission lines and expansion of Taylor series for the distributed line model parameters. The mutual coupling between all phases and the untransposition of the line are considered to obtain precise results. The faulty phases are determined using Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL) and all fault types including normal shunt and inter-circuit faults can be located. DIgSILENT Power Factory software is used to simulate the power system and the fault location calculations are carried out using MATLAB. The proposed scheme is investigated under different fault locations, fault inception angles, fault types, and fault resistances. The influence of soil resistivity variation, measurement and synchrophasors errors, errors in line parameters, various line lengths, non-linear time-varying arc resistance, and complex fault impedance is also investigated. The simulation results confirm the validity of the fault location scheme for all test cases.
Gabor transform-based fault location method for multi-terminal transmission lines
 Fault location in multi-terminal transmission lines is faced with different challenges such as high computation burden imposed by signal processing tools and different transmission line topologies. In this paper, a new method based on the Gabor transform (GT) for fault section determination and fault location calculation in multi-terminal lines is presented. The paper describes some benefits of the GT for analyzing modal components of synchronized current (or voltage) signals at all terminals. Then, to determine fault section and fault location, the arrival times of the first peak waves generated by the fault is utilized. One of the features of the GT is that it does not need to choose any tuning parameters. Moreover, it has robust performance under noisy conditions. The GT exerts low computation burden and it is based on the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), making it suitable for practical implementation. In this paper, the proposed method is also compared with a number of different fault location algorithms. The obtained numerical results under various fault conditions confirm the efficacy of the proposed method. The results also show that the proposed fault locator is independent of the power system configuration.
Transmission line fault detection and location using Wide Area Measurements
 Knowledge of both voltage and current data is conventionally entailed for locating fault on transmission network. However, owing to the non-linearity of the system, the process becomes iterative and cumbersome. In order to address this issue, a new technique for fault location on transmission lines using only voltage measurements obtained from Wide Area Measurement Systems (WAMS) and the network bus admittance matrix has been reported in this paper. It is based on the fundamental law of electrical networks. It delineates a single step method to find out the faulted line and the exact location of fault. The decision is based on change in injected current at various buses following the line fault. The method has been tested on IEEE 14 bus and New England 39 bus system. Applicability of the proposed algorithm is independent of fault type, location of fault and fault resistance. This method not only proves to be accurate but also furnishes quick results with reduced computational burden. Besides, the faulted phase as well as fault type detection has been suggested in this paper using same measurements.
Unsynchronized fault-location technique for two- and three-terminal transmission lines
 In this work, a novel fault-locator technique for two- and three-terminal power transmission lines is introduced. Unsynchronized three-phase current and voltage measurements of all line ends are processed for estimating the required synchronization angle/s and the fault location via exploiting the initial conditions of each fault type. To realize this target, the computations of the required synchronization angle/s are initially accomplished independent of the fault location via considering a lumped charging current at the reference terminal which is selected arbitrarily. Consequently, the initial fault location is determined via equating the deduced equations of the positive-sequence voltage at the faulty point from two sides of the faulted segment as a function of the measured data after their correction. The previous obtained fault location is, then, utilized as an input for the next iterative computations, where the distributed line model is used to update the charging current. This process is repeated until the change rate of the obtained fault location becomes negligible. The proposed technique has been examined and assessed under different fault scenarios simulated using MATLAB. The sample results of the assessment are declared and discussed.
Accurate arcing fault location method for M-terminal transmission lines
 Arcing faults (AFs) are highly complex nonlinear phenomena which in turn cause voltages and currents of M-terminal transmission lines vary nonlinearly with time. So, the conventional fault location algorithms which use fundamental frequency of the signals, cannot locate the AFs, precisely. This paper proposes an accurate method to locate the AFs occurring on M-terminal transmission lines. The algorithm consists of two subroutines. In subroutine 1, the faulty section is determined; and in subroutine 2, the exact location of AF is calculated. The proposed method uses synchronized voltage and current measurements at all terminals and does not employ source impedances of the external networks. In addition, the proposed method takes advantage of distributed parameter line model in the time domain which accurately models the line. Since just one minimization problem is used for all AF types, classification of AF type and selection of faulty phase are not needed. An extensive series of simulations has been performed. The results, considering various AF conditions, show the high accuracy and efficiency of the offered method.
New fault location scheme for three-terminal untransposed parallel transmission lines
 This paper proposes a new fault location scheme in the phase-domain for three-terminal untransposed double-circuit transmission lines utilizing synchronized voltage and current measurements obtained by GPS technique. The proposed scheme is derived taking into consideration the distributed line model and the mutual couplings effect between the parallel lines to obtain accurate results. The proposed scheme is derived based on the transmission line theory and Taylor series expansion of the distributed line model parameters. All fault types including normal shunt faults, evolving faults, and cross-country faults can be discriminated from each other and the fault location can be obtained for all fault types. The evolving faults include earth faults occurring at the same location in two phases of one circuit or two phases of different circuits at different fault inception time. While cross-country faults include earth faults occurring at different locations in two phases of one circuit or two phases of different circuits at same or different fault inception time. The proposed scheme is tested under different fault locations, different fault resistances, different fault inception angles, and all fault types including cross-country and evolving faults. Also, the effect of different sampling rate, measurement and synchronization errors, earth resistivity variations, and transmission line parameters errors on the proposed scheme is considered. Simulations studies conducted by MATLAB software demonstrate that the maximum estimation error in fault location does not exceed 3.06%.
Fault test analysis in transmission lines throughout interfering synchrophasor signals
 The distribution of power supplies be obliged to offer reliable, superior-quality in power. To obtain good power quality the transmission line faults identification should be more precise, consistence and complete rectification is required. The faults in the transmission and distribution lines influence the power quality. The major faults in transmission lines such as line to ground fault, line-to-line fault and three-phase faults. This paper proposes a unique organized interrelated structure for fault-location and classification technique for transmission lines through an experimental set-up similar to transmission and distribution for good power quality. The proposed method utilizes synchrophasor measurements during the disturbances from the transmission lines and compares with ideal condition signals for fault location and classification. From the results, the synchrophasor measurements identify faults in the initial stage. The phasor measurement results are modelled through regression modelling for precise measurement. Various faults are modelled for the earlier detection in the transmission lines.
Transmission line fault location using hybrid wavelet-Prony method and relief algorithm
 Context: Intelligent fault locating in transmission lines consists of three main steps: feature extraction, feature selection, and utilizing a learning tool. Objective: The main objective of this paper is to propose a systematic approach for intelligent fault locating in transmission lines. Method: This paper extracts a group of candidate features by applying a combination of the Wavelet Packet Decomposition (WPD) and Improved Prony Analysis (IPA) methods on single-ended voltage measurements. To have an accurate fault location estimate, useful and efficient features are selected among the candidate features using the regression relief algorithm. In this paper, performances of three regression learning tools including the Generalized Regression Neural Network (GRNN), k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) and the Random Forests (RF) in the fault location problem are evaluated and compared, and the best tool is introduced. Results: Numerous training and test patterns are generated through simulation of various fault types in an untransposed transmission line based on different values of fault location, fault resistance, fault inception angle, and magnitude and direction of load current. The results of evaluation using theses patterns show the high efficiency and accuracy of the proposed approach. For various fault types in the test cases, the average values of fault location estimation errors are in the range of 0.153–0.202%. Conclusion: Besides accuracy, the proposed fault locating method is immune against current signal measurement errors and it does not face the problems and costs related to the transmitting and synchronizing data of both line ends.
Fast accurate fault location on transmission system utilizing wide-area unsynchronized measurements
 This article presents a closed-form solution for transmission line fault location without the need for GPS-synchronized sampling of wide-area measurements. Unsynchronized measurements recorded by sparse intelligent electronic devices (IEDs) across the grid are gathered and bus impedance matrix is utilized to relate the measurements to fault location by nonlinear complex functions. A linear reformulation of the problem allows for integrating unsynchronized voltage and current measurements, together with two auxiliary variables, into a linear least-squares problem. Schur-Banachiewicz inversion formula is next utilized to obtain a closed-form solution for fault location. The distributed parameter model of the line is considered and the method identifies the faulted line and locates the fault along it regardless of fault type and resistance. Furthermore, in contrast to previous methods, the proposed method on the one hand obviates the need for GPS-synchronized sampling, and on the other hand avoids iterative procedures. Extensive time-domain simulations for the WSCC 9-bus and a 22-bus subnetwork of the IEEE 118-bus test systems confirm the effectiveness of the method for different faults across the grid.
Design of a one-sided, impedance-based transmission line fault locator using line topology and source impedances
 The article discusses an algorithm for a one-sided, impedance-based (transmission) line fault locator using line topology. Standard one-sided impedance-based fault locators, included in the digital protection systems [2], [3], [4], [8] compute the distance to the fault using the symmetrical components of line impedance. Section 5 demonstrates that this method of determining the distance to the fault exhibits significant inaccuracies in the case of a non-transposed line. The designed algorithm eliminates this inaccuracy, as it computes the distance to the fault with regard to impedance of corresponding phase, or more precisely the faulty loop. Moreover, the algorithm reflects the source impedances on both sides of the line and therefore eliminates or decreases the influence of power from the opposite side to determine the distance to the fault.
Analysis of half-wavelength transmission line under critical balanced faults: Voltage response and overvoltage mitigation procedure
 This paper presents a detailed study of half-wavelength (HWL) transmission line system under critical fault conditions. This non-conventional ultra high voltage alternating current (UHVAC) transmission line has excellent properties in steady-state operation condition and economic advantage when compared to conventional UHVAC system and even high voltage direct current (HVDC) transmission systems for similar power capacity. This technology has been studied for many decades and its response under condition fault is an important topic. First, the point of fault and the type of fault conditions are evaluated to confirm that balanced faults in specific regions are critical. Then the main characteristics of voltage response of HWL transmission system under balanced fault are presented and critical regions that produce severe overvoltage are identified and main transient characteristics are described. Finally, a preliminary mitigation procedure is shown and its performance is evaluated.
A double ended AC series arc fault location algorithm for a low-voltage indoor power line using impedance parameters and a neural network
 This paper presents a novel method for the distance estimation of a series arc fault in a low-voltage indoor power line. This method is based on the SIMULINK modeling of an electrical line by using its RLCG parameters. Rather than using an arc fault model, arc faults are inserted at different points across the line, using measured data. Faults using carbonized paths and opening contacts between two copper electrodes are considered. The algorithm estimates the arc fault distances by employing both the voltages and currents at two ends of the line, calculating their DFFT (Discrete Fast Fourier Transform) and then inserting these magnitudes, into Kirchhoff equations which take into account impedance parameters of the simplified approach line model. The arc fault is generated at an unknown distance. As the impedance parameters depend on the fault location, sets of supposed fault distances (varying by one-meter steps) are inserted in these equations. Thus, the extraction of currents peak values at the fundamental frequency (50 Hz) generates a signature vector. A neural network is trained using signature vectors as inputs (for faults generated at different distances). Finally, the algorithm thus developed is validated in two steps. First, the fault distances are estimated using distances not considered in the training process. Secondly, the fault distances are estimated using other series arc faults data not considered in the learning process. The results obtained in this work show that fault location can be successfully estimated both for faults generated by opening contacts and for carbonized paths. Additionally, the algorithm has successfully tested on different line lengths and considering also changes on the impedance parameters of the line.
Fault location in series-compensated transmission lines based on heuristic method
 This paper presents an algorithm for fault-location for series-compensated transmission lines based on phase components and on an heuristic method. The proposed algorithm uses voltages and currents measurements provided by intelligent electronic devices installed at both line ends to calculate the voltages at the fault point and to determine the exact fault location. The paper also presents a detailed mathematical model of the series compensation, which is capable of representing its behavior accurately, improving the algorithm's response. The authors implemented a series-compensated double-circuit transmission line using the Alternative Transients Program, in order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm. The results indicate that it presents a high level of accuracy.
A Novel Fault Detection and Fault Location Method for VSC-HVDC Links Based on Gap Frequency Spectrum Analysis
 This paper proposes a one-end gap-based fault location method for VSC-HVDC transmission line using the fault current signal. Using the post-fault current time series, the frequency spectrum is generated for measuring the gaps between the contiguous peak frequencies. This method is able to locate the fault by analyzing the single-end fault current, which guarantees a faster response than using two-end data. The new gap-based approach is able to give accurate fault detection using any appropriate range of post-fault signal. Furthermore, the proposed method is fault resistance independent. A two-terminal VSC-HVDC system is modeled in PSCAD/EMTDC. The algorithm is verified by studying different cases of different fault resistances in various fault locations. The result shows that the proposed method gives an accurate and reliable fault location detection along DC transmission line. In addition, the proposed algorithm can be potentially used in other HVDC systems.
Support vector machine based fault classification and location of a long transmission line
 This paper investigates support vector machine based fault type and distance estimation scheme in a long transmission line. The planned technique uses post fault single cycle current waveform and pre-processing of the samples is done by wavelet packet transform. Energy and entropy are obtained from the decomposed coefficients and feature matrix is prepared. Then the redundant features from the matrix are taken out by the forward feature selection method and normalized. Test and train data are developed by taking into consideration variables of a simulation situation like fault type, resistance path, inception angle, and distance. In this paper 10 different types of short circuit fault are analyzed. The test data are examined by support vector machine whose parameters are optimized by particle swarm optimization method. The anticipated method is checked on a 400 kV, 300 km long transmission line with voltage source at both the ends. Two cases were examined with the proposed method. The first one is fault very near to both the source end (front and rear) and the second one is support vector machine with and without optimized parameter. Simulation result indicates that the anticipated method for fault classification gives high accuracy (99.21%) and least fault distance estimation error (<0.21%) for all discussed cases. In order to verify the accuracy of the proposed method, a comparison is carried out with methods published by other researchers. Separate investigation is also carried out with the transmission line placing thyristor controlled series capacitor in the middle and applying the same proposed method. It is observed from the test results of the thyristor controlled series capacitor based transmission line model that fault classification gives a high accuracy of 98.36% and absolute fault location error is >0.29%.
ICA feature extraction for the location and classification of faults in high-voltage transmission lines
 Several methods for the location and classification of faults in power transmission lines using computational intelligence and digital signal processing techniques have been described in literature. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) and wavelet transform (WT) have drawn significant attention lately, but they present some drawbacks when dealing with power systems faults where data are often contaminated by noise. This paper proposes an approach by combining independent component analysis (ICA) with travelling wave (TW) theory and support vector machine (SVM). The approach is adequate to locate and recognize faults in high-voltage (HV) transmission lines, while the acquired signals are noisy. Experiments performed for distinct types and locations of faults in a real transmission line model have shown that the proposed combined methods are able to provide excellent performance in fault location. The obtained errors are lower than 1% and accuracy is 100% for the classification of fault signals with noise. It can be stated that this method presents better performance than those regarding the main conventional techniques such as wavelets and neural networks in the presence of noise.
A single-ended fault location method for segmented HVDC transmission line
 This paper presents a single-ended traveling wave-based fault location method for segmented high voltage DC (HVDC) transmission lines; an overhead line combined with an underground cable. DC transient voltage and current signals at the sending-end of the overhead line are assumed to be available. Discrete Wavelet Transformation (DWT) is then applied to the DC voltage and current signals. The wavelet energies of voltage and current transients over 16 ms (i.e. 1-cyle in 60-Hz frequency) are calculated and then normalized. The normalized energies are used as the input to a binary Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier for faulty section identification (underground cable or overhead line). Once the faulty section is identified, the faulty-half is determined by comparing polarity of the first two current traveling waves. Bewley diagrams are finally observed for the traveling wave pattern and the wavelet coefficients squared of DC voltage are used to locate the fault. The transient voltage and current for different fault locations are simulated using the ATP software. MATLAB is used to process the simulated transients and apply the proposed method. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated for different fault locations and fault resistances. The impacts of non-linear high impedance faults (NLHIF) and cable aging are also studied.
A new fault detection and fault location method for multi-terminal high voltage direct current of offshore wind farm
 This paper proposes a novel protection scheme for multi-terminal High Voltage Direct Current (MTDC) systems incorporating offshore wind farm based on high-frequency components detected from the fault current signal. This method can accurately detect the fault on each line and classify the fault types. Using the post-fault current time series, both single-ended measurements (detection and classification) and double-end measurements (location), the frequency spectrum is generated to measure the gaps between the contiguous peak frequencies giving a robust and comprehensive scheme. Unlike the previous travelling wave based methods, which must identify the travelling wavefront and require a high sampling rate, the new gap-based approach is able to give accurate fault detection and fault location using any appropriate range of post-fault signals. Furthermore, the proposed method is fault resistance independent and thus even a very high fault impedance has no effect on the fault location detection. By immediately tripping the faults, the fault-caused disturbance to the offshore wind farm is minimized. A three-terminal voltage sourced converter HVDC (VSC-HVDC) system connection of offshore wind farm is modelled in PSCAD/EMTDC (Power Systems Computer Aided Design/Electro-Magnetic Transients including DC) software, which is used for obtaining the fault current data for the transmission line terminal. The algorithm is verified by studying a range of cases, by varying the fault resistance fault locations and also including external faults. The results show that the proposed method gives an accurate and reliable fault detection, classification and location on the test MTDC system.
A novel single-ended fault location scheme for parallel transmission lines using k-nearest neighbor algorithm
 This paper proposes k-nearest neighbour (k-NN)-based method for fault location estimation of all types of fault in parallel lines using one-terminal measurement. Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is used for pre-processing the signals and then the standard deviation of one cycle of pre-fault and one cycle of post-fault samples are used as inputs to k-NN algorithm. The results obtained under various fault conditions demonstrate the high accuracy of the proposed scheme to estimate the fault location. The accuracy of the k-NN-based fault location scheme is not affected by alteration in fault type including inter-circuit faults, fault location, fault inception angle, fault resistance, and pre-fault load angle.
Fault location in power distribution network with presence of distributed generation resources using impedance based method and applying π line model
 The power distribution networks (PDN) are spread in different street and Alley. Furthermore, nowadays, the DG is used in PDN, especially photovoltaic (PV). Therefore, fault location in these PDNs is complex. In this paper, an improved impedance based method has been proposed for fault location in power distribution network with presence of photovoltaic distributed generation resources. According that the PV has an uncertain behavior in different conditions, the proposed method is designed to be robust against PV behavior and upstream feeder changes. In the suggested method, detail equations are derived to prove a new quadratic equation for locating fault in PDNs using recorded voltage and current at the beginning of feeder and DG terminals. According to this proved equation is depended on to just voltage and currents of source or substation terminals, consequently dynamic modeling of PV and substation is not important in the proposed method. Within this method, the π line model is used for improving the accuracy of the suggested method. To evaluate the accuracy of the proposed method, the modified 11 node test Feeder is simulated in the MATLAB software and sensitivity of the suggested method was investigated against the different fault distances fault types, fault resistances and fault inception angles. Furthermore, the proposed method is investigated and tested on the real test feeder in power system simulator of power system and protection Lab. in Persian Gulf University. The results indicate the high accuracy of the algorithm.
Measurement of fault resistances in transmission lines by using recorded signals at both line ends
 This article shows the results obtained by using a method for the calculation of fault resistances in transmission lines, like these resistances are really seen at the location of protective relays. The method is based on a well-known algorithm for fault location, which is complemented here in order to compute the fault resistances. The original algorithm for fault location only uses information from one line end, and it is applied twice here (once from each line end) in order to obtain the information to compute the fault resistances. For each fault, a fault resistance is computed from each line end, and the reported value is the average of both values if they satisfy the selected criterion of coherence (otherwise, the measurement is considered as no valid). This method was applied for the measurement of fault resistances for 70 actual faults, recorded at different voltage levels (230 kV, 400 kV, and 765 kV). The statistical behavior of these measured values shows that the fault resistances are moderate in a high percentage of cases. The knowledge about the statistical behavior of fault resistances is important for the protection of transmission lines, and these results can be complemented in the future by analyzing more data, in order to improve this knowledge. Other methods, based in other fault location algorithms, could be also applied in order to obtain the measured values of fault resistances from recorded data of real faults. The application of a criterion of coherence, for comparing the computed values of fault resistance from each line end, is a novel idea and it is important to consider the possible imperfections in the measurements and/or in power system models.
Fault localization for transmission lines with optimal Phasor Measurement Units
 This paper discusses a novel fault localization algorithm for multi-terminal transmission lines. The technique is tested for different fault types and fault locations. The exact fault location is determined along with the latitude and longitude by involving geo-referenced data of the power system. In addition, Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) are effectively used for complete system observability. The number of PMUs is optimised using Genetic Algorithm. Thus, the objective is to find the distance of the fault occurrence and to locate the fault point along with the latitude and longitude, using optimal PMUs. For evaluation purpose, Indian Utility (TamilNadu Electricity Board) 49 bus system is used and validated, using software such as MATLAB, Power World Simulator and Google Earth View. The results show the effectiveness of the proposed technique to spot the exact fault point in the transmission lines with a minimum number of PMUs, to make the concept economical.
Impedance-based fault location methods: Sensitivity analysis and performance improvement
 This paper deals with analysis and improvement of two-terminal impedance based fault location methods for transmission lines. Firstly, a customised sensitivity analysis (CSA) for this class of methods is discussed, which allows a more comprehensive analysis than those so far used for evaluating the robustness to uncertainties of the input parameters (such as phasors and electrical line parameters). Second, a customised modal transformation (CMT) is derived from CSA, aiming to improve impedance-based fault location methods for performance. Such an approach uses the Park transformation along with a cost function obtained from the CSA. To assess the effectiveness of the developed approach, four two-terminal fault location methods from the literature, using both distributed parameter line model and only fault data, are considered. Evaluation tests based on Alternative Transients Program (ATP) simulations have shown that the proposed approach presents results quantitatively superior than other approaches from the literature confirming its applicability.
Fault location scheme for multi-terminal transmission lines using unsynchronized measurements
 In this paper, a simple alternative fault location algorithm for multi-terminal transmission lines using unsynchronized measurements is proposed. The developed data synchronization procedure is employed to identify the faulted leg before the fault location is calculated. The fault location algorithm is independent of the fault resistance and source impedance variations. The proposed faulted leg identification and location algorithm is extensively tested for all major fault types and different high fault resistances. The results show that the proposed multi-terminal fault location algorithm is fast, accurate and immune to power system transients.
Two-terminal AF location scheme for multi-segment combined transmission lines using unsynchronized measurements
 Arcing faults (AFs) have probabilistic and nonlinear nature which is related to environmental parameters. Thus, the conventional fault location methods can not locate the AFs, accurately. This article puts forward a novel and precise AF location technique for multi-segment combined transmission lines which uses unsynchronized measurements from two terminals of the line. The method consists of stages; the number of them is equal to the number of segments plus one. This scheme does not need to employ a selector to identify the faulty segment of the line. Finally, the case studies are carried out using MATLAB/Simulink with variations of fault conditions including fault distance, type, incidence angle and faulty segment of the line, and also with variations of synchronization angle which show that the presented method provides a high accuracy in AF location under various situations.
Optimal placement of voltage measurements for wide area fault location observability considering the uncertainty of network parameters
 This paper proposes an optimization method based on genetic algorithm (GA) to determine the number and location of phasor measurement units (PMUs) in order to wide area fault location based on voltage measurement. In the practical condition, due to the uncertainty of network parameters including measurement errors and inaccuracy of line parameter values, the estimation of the fault location may be not accurate. Therefore, the proposed method has been developed to determine the number and location of PMUs in order to achieve an acceptable accuracy with required reliability. Since the number and location of PMU depends on the fault location method, a new fault location method has been developed with minimum required number of PMUs. The new method can determine the fault location by measuring from one side of the fault point instead of two sides. Therefore, the number of required PMUs is minimized at comparison to previously presented methods. The weighted least-square (WLS) method is used to solve the fault location problem by minimizing the measurement errors. To consider unsynchronized condition of measurements, the formulation has been modified using only the magnitudes of voltage measurements. Finally, the method has been applied on New England 39-bus test system, and the results show the efficiency of the proposed PMU placement and fault location methods in the network with the uncertainty of parameters.
Performance assessment of swarm-assisted mean error estimation-based fault detection technique for transmission line protection
 In this paper, a fast and computationally efficient fault detection algorithm is proposed for power transmission network protection using mean error estimation technique. In order to avoid false detection, instead of adopting the traditional trial and error-based approach, particle swarm optimization-assisted optimal threshold setting method is introduced in this paper. Performance of the proposed fault detection technique is tested for numerous fault and non-fault events generated on a two-bus test power system through MATLAB/SIMULINK software. The observations on results clearly show that using the proposed method even critical faults can be detected securely within a quarter cycle of the 50 Hz power system. The comparative assessment with two existing methods confirms the effectiveness of the proposed scheme.
Transmission lines fault location using transient signal spectrum
 This paper proposes a method for fault location on transmission lines, which is based on time to frequency domain transformation of transient signals of the fault instant measured at one end. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is used for time to frequency domain transformation and frequency of the first fault generated harmonic is utilised for determination of the fault location using the travelling wave theory of the transmission line. The accuracy of the method has been tested using the simulations carried out in Alternative Transients Program (ATP/EMTP) with frequency-dependent distributed parameter transmission line model by considering several cases and various types of faults, different values of fault resistance and phase angle at fault instant. The method has good accuracy and the simulation results show that the accuracy of the method is insensitive to the fault resistance and phase angle of the fault instant. Reactive elements may affect the resolution but, it can be removed by applying the correction procedure proposed.
Online fault location on AC cables in underground transmission systems using sheath currents
 This paper studies online travelling wave methods for fault location on a crossbonded cable system using sheath currents. During the construction of the electrical connection to the 400 MW off shore wind farm Anholt, it was possible to perform measurements on a 38.4 km crossbonded cable system. At 31.4 km, all cables were accessible which made it possible to apply a fault using an arc free breaker and measure the travelling waves at each end of the cable. On a crossbonded cable system, the sheaths are short circuited and grounded at both ends. This makes possible the use of low voltage Rogowski coils if the sheath currents contain the necessary information for accurate fault location. In this paper, this is examined by analysis of field measurements and through a study of simulations. The wavelet transform and a visual inspection method are used and the accuracy is compared. Field measurements and simulations are compared for testing the reliability of using simulations for studying fault location methods.
Fault location method applied to transmission lines of general configuration
 Power quality is an important concern once automation is present in almost all industrial process. Since fault occurrences affects the power quality considerably, in this paper is proposed a new fault location method applied to transmission lines constituted of any configuration, as example double circuit, untransposed sections, and multiple derivations. In order to locate the fault, the method uses voltage and current phasors gathered from terminals with measures, however the method does not need these measures from all terminals. The proposed method is composed of three blocks to locate the fault, which are: Algorithm’s Main Control, Grid Scanning Process, and Objective Function’s Minimization Process. A large number of simulations were conducted and the results show the accuracy and efficiency of the method, even in cases of high impedance faults.
Analysis of Fault and Determination of Damping Co-efficient and DC-Offset in a High Voltage Transmission Line
 Fault analysis in transmission and distribution system is an important requirement to safeguard the power system. Fault analysis in a system is carried out for proper choice of protective relaying components in the transmission and distribution system. In addition, an estimate is made regarding the characteristics of the fault for protection by circuit breaker. In order to study the complete performance of faults on transmission lines, the variation of damping coefficient and DC offset of the system is discussed. In this paper, a single phase to ground fault is simulated. The short circuit currents are calculated by simulating faults at various points on the wave of supply and at various distances to account for fault current, damping and DC offset. The fault simulation is done using Electromagnetic Transient Programme
An intelligent algorithm for fault location on VSC-HVDC system
 This paper proposes a novel intelligent algorithm for fault location on the voltage sourced converter-high voltage direct current (VSC-HVDC) system. This method with single-ended measurement makes full use of frequency, time and energy to capture the fault features via Hilbert-Huang Transform (HHT). The time delay, characteristic frequency, energy attenuation and high-frequency energy are used as the input of ε-support vector regression (SVR) to get fault distance. Then bat algorithm (BA) optimizes the parameters of the model with cross validation comparing with other optimization algorithm. Furthermore, high-frequency variance contribution rate (HVCR) is adopted to identify the fault area. The VSC-HVDC simulation system is constructed to verify the reliability and accuracy of the method and the expected accuracy of the proposed method is ±500 m. The results demonstrated that the proposed method still has reliability and accuracy for hybrid transmission line with a small amount of data.
A new methodology for multiple incipient fault diagnosis in transmission lines using QTA and Naïve Bayes classifier
 Transmission lines’ monitoring systems are hybrid-dynamical structures produce a large amount of data that renders faults diagnosis difficult. Moreover, multiple faults of unknown nature can occur simultaneously impeding their discrimination. In addition, the feature extraction step constitutes an inherent limitation to the diagnosis of multiple faults. Indeed, a feature extraction algorithm avoiding any masking effect among between different multiple faults is hard to devise. This paper proposes a methodology dedicated to the diagnosis of multiples faults in transmission lines using both and experimental and calculated Leakage Current (LC) signals’ harmonics as residuals. Measured data from the real transmission line was used to modelling normal operating mode. Besides, different scenarios, including insulator chains contamination with different types and concentrations of pollutants were modeled by equivalents circuits to generate a multiple faults scenario. LCs from deteriorated insulators were inserted in the transmission line normal operating mode to implement a faulty operating conditions model. Qualitative trend analysis (QTA) was used to generate primitives and by exploiting the leakage current difference between normal and faulty operating conditions to define a features extraction algorithm for the diagnosis of specific fault modes. A Naïve Bayes classifier was designed in order to identify the most prominent fault in a multiple faults scenario by means of LC data. The methodology manages to split multiple faults into single faults and reaches a classification accuracy for multiple faults of 95%.
A performance oriented impedance based fault location algorithm for series compensated transmission lines
 This paper proposes a performance oriented fault location algorithm for series compensated transmission lines. The algorithm estimates the fault location based on the calculated fault voltage and current using two end measurements and line parameters. Fault location computations are carried out considering faults existed before or after the compensator location on the line. The calculated MOV impedance is the key factor in determining whether or not the fault is located in front of the compensator. A 380 kV transmission line with a series capacitor and an MOV has been tested for various fault types, fault locations and fault resistances. The results show that the algorithm accurately estimates the fault location for all cases.
Detection and classification of internal faults in bipolar HVDC transmission lines based on K-means data description method
 This paper proposes a novel protection scheme for detection and classification of internal faults in bipolar HVDC transmission lines using the K-means data description (KMDD) method. In the proposed protection scheme, the inverter-side dc voltage and current signals are utilized. Relatively short-time windows are considered for these signals, and the sum values of data windows are calculated. In the preparation stage, for each dc fault type, the KMDD method is applied to some post-fault data generated in various conditions. Then, the obtained centroids and thresholds are used for detecting and classifying new internal dc faults even with unseen conditions. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated for 4320 internal and 2816 external fault cases in a 1000 km bipolar overhead HVDC transmission line under various conditions not seen in the preparation stage. Besides simplicity and low sampling frequency requirement of the proposed protection scheme, the obtained results show that it is fast and accurate enough for the internal dc faults, and also it is stable during the external ac faults and the pre-fault normal conditions.
A new single ended fault location algorithm for combined transmission line considering fault clearing transients without using line parameters
 In this paper a new single ended fault location method is proposed for underground cable combined with overhead lines. In this algorithm fault clearing high frequency transients are used instead of fault-generated transients and the line parameters are not needed. In the proposed algorithm, samples just from voltage transients generated by fault clearing action of circuit breaker are taken from the sending end of the cable line. Applying wavelet transform, the first three inceptions of traveling waves to the fault locator are detected. Using these, the proposed algorithm at first identifies fault section, overhead or cable, and then wave speed is calculated and at last location of fault is determined accurately. Because of using only voltage samples taken from one terminal, it is simple and economic and does not need to GPS and data communication and synchronization. Extensive simulations carried out using SimPowerSystem toolbox of MATLAB, confirm the capabilities and high accuracy of the proposed method under different system and fault conditions.
A new algorithm for fault location in series compensated transmission lines with TCSC
 In this paper a new algorithm for accurate fault location in advanced series compensated transmission lines with Thyristor Controlled Series Capacitor (TCSC) is presented. Time domain modeling of a transmission line and the TCSC system are used in the proposed algorithm. This algorithm consists of two subroutines considering faults in the line sections i.e. in front of TCSC and behind it. Subroutines selection in the algorithm is performed by using a parameter known as the Fault Section Indicator (FSI). FSI is, in fact, the virtual resistance of the TCSC measured during the first cycle of fault inception. The one-cycle FSI trend indicates the faulty section, and an accurate method is adopted for fault location estimation. Extensive simulations were carried out using ATP-EMTP software on a 400 kV, 300 km transmission system with the TCSC installed in the middle of the line. The results confirm the capability of the FSI parameter for correct identification of faulty section and the accuracy of the proposed fault location algorithm.
A new wavelet based fault detection, classification and location in transmission lines
 This paper deals with the application of wavelet transforms for the detection, classification and location of faults on transmission lines. A Global Positioning System clock is used to synchronize sampling of voltage and current signals at both the ends of the transmission line. The detail coefficients of current signals of both the ends are utilized to calculate fault indices. These fault indices are compared with threshold values to detect and classify the faults. Artificial Neural Networks are employed to locate the fault, which make use of approximate decompositions of the voltages and currents of local end. The proposed algorithm is tested successfully for different locations and types of faults.
Fault location on transmission lines little longer than half-wavelength
 AC transmission lines little longer than half-wavelength have been widely investigated as an alternative for bulk power transmission in power networks where the generation plants are very distant from the load centers. However, studies regarding the performance of fault location methods applied to this type of line have not been done. In this paper, two contributions are presented. First, it is shown that conventional impedance-based fault location methods may fail to correctly identify the fault point even when the line shunt capacitance effect is taken into account. Then, to overcome this drawback, an innovative two-terminal impedance-based fault location algorithm is proposed. The algorithm considers the distributed parameter line model with line shunt capacitances thereby is able to reliably identify and correct erroneous fault point estimations that arise due to atypical operational features of this particular type of transmission line. The performance evaluation of the proposed algorithm is carried out by means of Electromagnetic Transients Program (EMTP) simulations, from which a wide variety of faults in a 1000 kV AC transmission line 2613 km long is analyzed. The obtained results indicate high reliability of the proposed algorithm, which is almost insensitive to the fault characteristics, power system load flow, power factor and line transposition schemes.
Methodology for testing a parameter-free fault locator for transmission lines
 This paper presents a comparison between two different approaches to fault location both with and without utilising transmission line parameters. Firstly, an impedance-based parameter-dependent algorithm, derived by using modal transformation theory and fast Fourier transform is presented. The methodology is able to locate the fault whether it is on an overhead line or on an underground power cable. The second algorithm is a parameter-free fault location method that uses time synchronised data. Here, the unknown fault location is determined from voltage and current phasors, synchronously measured at both line terminals. This approach to fault location avoids the requirement for prior knowledge of line parameters, which is advantageous as line parameters are not always known precisely. This paper presents the results of algorithm testing through the use of ATPDraw simulations and MATLAB. The results were validated through laboratory experiments. The results of the line parameter-free model are compared with those from the parameter-dependent model. Both algorithms were tested for single line to ground faults.
A fault location criterion for MTDC transmission lines using transient current characteristics
 Multi-terminal DC (MTDC) transmission system is applied in modern power systems due to its technical features. In an MTDC system, the converter stations are generally connected in parallel. To smooth the DC current output from the converter, the smoothing reactors are integrated in the converter outputs, instead of in the DC transmission line. When a fault occurs on the DC transmission line of the MTDC system, the fault current will flow along the whole DC line. As a result, the protection scheme may not locate the fault accurately. Based on the characteristics of DC filter, this paper analyzes the impedance characteristics of the combinational circuits, and proposes a method to identify the fault location by the characteristic harmonic. A protection criterion of the non-integer harmonics comparison is composed with phase-frequency characteristics curve derived from complex wavelet transform. The inevitable blind zone is analyzed in theory which exists on the terminal of transmission lines just like distance protection in AC systems. The algorithm is successfully tested and compared with other techniques.
New accurate fault location algorithm for parallel transmission lines using local measurements
 This paper presents a new accurate fault location algorithm for parallel transmission lines based on the distributed parameter line model. The new method requires only voltages and currents from one end of parallel lines. Based on sequence networks and boundary conditions, equations can be derived to obtain the fault location. The new method fully considers shunt capacitance of the line, and mutual impedance and mutual admittance between the lines by using accurate model for both positive- and zero- sequence circuits, and obviates the need of iterative process to compensate for the capacitance. The method is independent of fault resistance, remote infeed and source impedances. EMTP simulation studies have been conducted to generate fault cases under various fault conditions to validate the proposed method. The results have shown that the developed algorithm can achieve highly accurate fault location estimates.
A novel single-phase-to-earth fault location method for distribution network based on zero-sequence components distribution characteristics
 Based on distribution characteristics of the zero-sequence voltages and currents of the distributed lines, this paper proposes a novel single-phase-to-earth fault (SPTEF) location scheme for distribution network. Firstly, the distributed parameter model of distribution feeder lines is appropriately simplified according to Taylor series expansion of the hyperbolic functions in the model. The fault factor is constructed to select the faulted feeder. Then, the distribution features of the zero-sequence voltage (ZV) along the feeder line are analyzed. In each section of the faulted feeder, golden section search algorithm is adopted to distinguish the faulted section. Finally, based on the concept of maximum fault current, accurate fault location is realized by genetic algorithm (GA). A radial distribution network model containing different types of distribution lines is established in PSCAD/EMTDC. The calculation results of MATLAB prove the validity, reliability and accuracy of the proposed fault location scheme.
Fault location scheme for a multi-terminal transmission line based on current traveling waves
 As very little research on the fault location for multi-terminal transmission lines based on current traveling waves only has been done, a new fault location scheme on this is proposed. The proposed scheme is different from the traditional ones based on fundamental impedance. Fast Intrinsic Mode Decomposition (FIMD) and Teager Energy Operator (TEO) are combined (FIMD&TEO) to detect the arrival time of the traveling wave at each terminal. Fault Distance Ratio Matrix (FDRM) and rules for identifying faulted sections of a multi-terminal transmission line are proposed and the method for building FDRM is presented in this paper. After several couples of local and remote terminals connecting through the faulted section are got, their fault distances are calculated by means of a two-ended traveling wave method, and then the fault point can be located by averaging the fault distances. Many simulations under various fault conditions have been done, and the results show that the proposed scheme can locate faults more accurately than existing impedance-based methods.
Generalized neural network and wavelet transform based approach for fault location estimation of a transmission line
 To maintain the efficient and reliable operation of power systems, it is extremely important that the transmission line faults need to be detected and located in a reliable and accurate manner. A number of mathematical and intelligent techniques are available in the literature for estimating the fault location. However, the results are not satisfactory due to the wide variation in operating conditions such as system loading level, fault inception instance, fault resistance and dc offset and harmonics contents in the transient signal of the faulted transmission line. Keeping in view of aforesaid, a new approach based on generalized neural network (GNN) with wavelet transform is presented for fault location estimation. Wavelet transform is used to extract the features of faulty current signals in terms of standard deviation. Obtained features are used as an input to the GNN model for estimating the location of fault in a given transmission systems. Results obtained from GNN model are compared with ANN and well established mathematical models and found more accurate.
A new FDOST entropy based intelligent digital relaying for detection, classification and localization of faults on the hybrid transmission line
 The paper presents a new digital relaying for detection, classification and localization of faults on the hybrid transmission line consisting of an overhead line and an underground cable. The entropy principle together with fast discrete orthogonal S-transform (FDOST) represented by window dependent bases is utilized for feature extraction and the support vector machine (SVM) classifier model & support vector regression (SVR) model are employed for pattern recognitions to predict the types and locations of faults. After modelling and simulation of the transmission system in Electromagnetic Transient Program (EMTP) software, three phase fault current signals are recorded at one end of the line to extract entropy of FDOST coefficients from each of the three current signals of half cycle duration after fault initiation. The proposed relaying technique is tested on a single-junction and a multi-junction hybrid transmission lines under different fault conditions and is found fast and accurate independent of fault type, fault section, fault resistance, fault inception angle (FIA) and load angle. Another important aspect of the method is that it needs no prior identification of the faulty section for the estimation of fault location. The immunity of the proposed method to noise is also established by testing it with fault current signals impregnated with white Gaussian noise of level 30 dB signal to noise ratio (SNR).
A closed-form solution for transmission line fault location using local measurements at a remote substation
 This paper presents a novel approach for fault location of overhead transmission lines by voltage and current measurements in a remote substation. The method is applicable when not all of the transmission lines in an area are equipped with fault-locators, although there may be a critical substation (CS) in the area equipped with a digital fault recorder (DFR). In the proposed method, the circuit equations of the network are used to find the transfer function between the fault location and each voltage and current measurement in the CS. Next, two auxiliary variables are defined to transform the nonlinear fault location estimation problem into a linear least squares problem. A closed-form solution is then obtained for fault location. The proposed formulation obviates the need to use unsynchronized or synchronized measurements from any other substation. Moreover, the proposed formulation does not necessitate fault type classification or fault resistance estimation. Furthermore, the distributed parameter model of the transmission line is considered in order for the method to be applicable to long transmission lines. Electromagnetic transient simulations for a 15-bus test system confirm accurate fault location estimation on remote transmission lines for different critical substations considered in the network.
New smart fault locator in compensated line with UPFC
 In this paper, a new smart fault locator in a compensated transmission line with a Unified Power Flow Controller (UPFC) is proposed. Three types of features are extracted from the captured fault signals at one-end of the compensated line by using a time-frequency signal processing tool known as the Hyperbolic S-Transform (HST). The HST, with an asymmetrical window, is an improved version of the S-transform. Then, the regression model of the Support Vector Machines (SVMs) with a non-linear kernel function is applied for the fault location estimation. The proposed smart fault locator gives accurate estimation results by involving hidden statistical features which comprise a new type of time-frequency features. The evaluation of the features and the estimation error obtained under different conditions confirm the efficacy of the proposed smart fault locator.
